---
title: 'Embellishments for our Words'
date: 2021-06-25
permalink: /posts/2012/08/blog-post-embellishments/
tags:
  - Random-Thoughts
  - Philosophy
---
**1 AM**: Amidst the sea of papers filled with triple integrals and discrete math questions, I sat there, half asleep, trying to start my 500 word essay. At the very moment where I seemed to muster the energy to write, a blinding light from my phone drew my attention to a text message. In the span of the next hour, I got only one sentence down on the paper. No surprise it didn't make it to the final cut; it never added anything to the final message. It was simply clutter, or as I like to call it: fluff. The fluff was a byproduct of the clutter that surrounded me both physically and mentally: the endless pile of papers, the barrage of text messages I had received. We are all surrounded by clutter and distractions - the random twitter feud that grabs our attention, or the new youtube video that just got posted. When we are plagued with clutter in our lives from all directions, it comes as no surprise that even our writing is also plagued with clutter. To add onto all of this, it would be insanity to think that readers would read fluff filled writing when they also have so many distractions. That is why it becomes paramount to have writing that is concise and easily understood by readers. In William Zinner’s essay “Simplicity”, we understand the effects of cluttered writing and how it originates. Firstly, a cluttered mind will lead to cluttered writing. Hence to decrease the negative effects of clutter, writers should first try and understand the point they are trying to make and then pick the fuzz out of the machinery. However it’s just as important to also recognize that writing without fuzz is very difficult. Hence, it must be approached in a systematic process. A sentence will not be perfect on the first try; rather through multiple iterations it slowly becomes more concise and clearer. After reading “Simplicity”, I understood that writing is always hard. But if we persist and become conscious of the fuzz, we can make our message more clear for our readers.  

In Zinner’s essay, he questions why Americans use unnecessary and meaningless words that add no value to a work but instead confuse the reader. He goes as far as to call clutter the “disease of American writing”. I know that there have been multiple times where I have tried to fill my essays with over the top vocabulary, simply to look and appear more advanced. However, I soon learned that this method of writing simply confused the reader and often pointed out how inexperienced a writer I was. Zinner argues that the best forms of writing simplify a sentence to its most basic components. But writing concise sentences is not easy and is often never accomplished on the first try. It requires tenacity and multiple iterations. 


Through reading Zinner’s essay, I took away a couple of ideas. Firstly, there is a delicate balance between giving detail and being concise. Secondly, we don’t need to make our writing fancy or embellish our words with fancy adjectives and adverbs. Instead, we just need to help readers understand our message with ease. As humans and writers, we all want to be sophisticated and respected. But it may do us some good to remember that *“Simplicity is the ultimate sophistication” - Leonardo Da Vinci*. 
