---
title: 'Romance in American Films'
date: 2023-03-21
permalink: /posts/2012/08/blog-post-film/
tags:
  - Random-Thoughts
  - Film
---
This is a blog post about some American Film History from a class I took. 

The American film industry has had to constantly adapt to both the social and the economic conditions of its time period. The influence of the social, economic, and technological changes on Hollywood is unquestionable - from the early 1900s when films were displayed as a spectacle and new technology to the 1930’s use of the star system to revive the economy after the Great Depression, and even in today's streaming platforms of the media conglomerates. The impact of these factors is highlighted through the differences in Hollywood films of different time periods, specifically the early 1940s and the 1960s. Hollywood in 1940 was still dominated by the star and studio system and was under stricter content restrictions from the Hays Code and the Office of War Information (OWI). On the other hand, by 1960, Hollywood's studio and star system had fallen apart, and the influence of the Hays code was insignificant. Two films that depict Hollywood's approach to filmmaking under these social and economic circumstances are *Casablanca* and *Bonnie and Clyde*. 

One of the major influences that resulted in different operating circumstances of Hollywood was the receding influence of the Hays Code and Office of War Information between 1940 and the late 1960s. The Hays Code prohibited profanity, nudity, and realistic violence and the OWI created a checklist to persuade directors to create films that supported the war effort. The presence and lack of these guidelines is very apparent in the different portrayals of romance in the two films. 1967’s *Bonnie and Clyde* portrayed romance as hot, thrilling, and aggressive. This can be seen in the open sex they have in the field and the camera movement in such romantic scenes to evoke the same adrenaline rush they get when robbing banks. Professor King of film studies at Brunel University also explains how the use of jump cuts and continuity editing contributed to an atmosphere of edginess and impatience surrounding the romance. This can be contrasted with *Casablanca* where Rick lets his love Ilse go with another man to help the fight of democracy against facism. In the film, Rick says that “I’m no good at being noble, but it doesn’t take much to see that the problems of three little people don’t amount to a hill of beans in this crazy world.” The portrayal of love and romance in *Casablanca* is sacrificial and selfless. With the context of WWII and the OWI’s checklist, Rick’s romance serves as a vehicle for Allied propaganda and emphasizes the view that romance is secondary in a time of war. The juxtaposition of the sacrificial romance versus the energetic and edgy romance highlights how Hollywood plot lines were greatly affected by the presence of government offices like the Office of War Information and self imposed censorship such as Hays Code. 

While social and government factors helped sway Hollywood’s movies, economic factors also played a large role in the marketing and formation of films. In the early 1940s, ticket sales were around 40-50 million per week, and Hollywood was economically profitable. On the other hand, the 1960s had ticket sales of only around 20 million per week.2 With the Paramount Decrees of 1948 preventing studios from owning exhibition and breaking vertical integration, Hollywood was at a financial low point in the 1960s. The marketing of the films *Casablanca* and *Bonnie and Clyde* reflect these economic conditions. In the poster of *Casablanca*, the actors’ names are almost as large as the title of the film, reflecting the power of the star system and how marketing was based simply on the stars acting in the film rather than on the plot itself. This can be contrasted with *Bonnie and Clyde* where the star system no longer had much influence, but an edgier content appealed to the audience. The poster of *Bonnie and Clyde* with the catch line, “They’re young…They’re in love… and They kill people” drew the audiences in with content they would not see under the restrictions of the Hays Code. Thus, the changing economic conditions between the 1940s and 1960s influenced the advertisement and production strategies of Hollywood. 

The disappearance of the Hays code, the end of WWII, and collapse of the studio and star system led to more edgier and provocative films as seen in the transitions of romance and marketing in *Casablanca* versus *Bonnie and Clyde*. 

